The junctions between exterior walls and other building components must be designed according to the rainscreen principle, maintaining the continuity between the building envelope systems and the various components — that is, the junctions must be designed with a first and second line of defence.6 Windows and doors may permit some rainwater into walls while still meeting the requirements for rain penetration stipulated by applicable standards. Electrical and mechanical penetrations must be sealed on the exterior, preferably with a gasket to minimize the hole created by the penetration.

Most of the literature on possible terrorist use of weapons of mass destruction has focused on so-called "nuclear terrorism." Entire books have been written on the subject. Even segments of the public at large are aware of certain aspects of this question, such as the existence of the US Nuclear Emergency Search Team (NEST) designed to counter threats or acts of nuclear terrorism. By contrast, comparatively little information can be found in the public domain on the possible terrorist use of chemical or biological agents, even though most specialists agree that the likelihood of such use is greater than in the case of nuclear materials.

For the most part, speculation about "CB terrorism" has been dealt with perfunctorily within broader discussions of "high-technology terrorism," "new technology terrorism," "mass destruction terrorism," "super-violence," or "nationally-disruptive terrorism" and the like. Furthermore, much of the speculation on this subject-which has worked its way into suspense novels and movie thrillers-has been derided by more sober analysts as overly sensationalist in nature.

Nevertheless, over the past two decades or so, a small body of professional literature on the subject of chemical-biological terrorism has accumulated. The object of this paper is, first, to review the existing body of unclassified information in an attempt to ascertain how real is the CB terrorist threat; and second, to examine the evolution of one, classified intergovernmental effort to deal with this question, including (by way of comparison) its own conclusions as to the reality of the threat.

The first part of the paper, then, will seek answers to (or at least try to shed some light on) the following set of questions: What factors or characteristics of chemical/biological agents might incline terrorists to their use or threat of use? How likely is it that a terrorist group would be capable of such an attack? (In particular, what degree of expertise would be required?) Which particular agents would be most likely to be used? How would these be acquired, and what means of delivery employed? Have there, in fact, been incidents of the use or threat of use of these weapons in the past? If not, why not? Based on current trends in terrorist operations and the world at large, what is the likelihood of future use of these agents by terrorists? Which kind of terrorist groups would be most likely to avail themselves of this type of warfare? And what, if anything, can be done to defend against such use? In short: How real is the threat posed by chemical or biological terrorism?

Because biological and chemical agents are so dissimilar, each category will be dealt with separately before the paper turns to an evaluation of their common elements or characteristics.


Projected population by age group according to three projection scenarios for 2006.

hat Safety Criteria and Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) Must a Cosmetic Meet?

The Food and Drugs Act and the Cosmetic Regulations set safety requirements. All cosmetics sold in Canada must be:

free from filth, foreign matter and substances that may injure the health of the user when the cosmetic is used according to label directions or customary ways of use;
manufactured, prepared, preserved packed and stored under sanitary conditions; and
on notification with the government as to the composition. (A manufacturer must disclose the composition of any cosmetic so that the acceptability of its ingredients can be monitored. If a safety concern arises, the cosmetic is prohibited from the market. Those "trade secrets" are considered confidential.)
There are currently no regulations specifying GMPs for cosmetics. However, products are expected to be manufactured with the general safety conditions specified in Section 16 and 18 of the Food and Drugs Act. For information on specific GMP guidelines, please read the United States Food and Drug Administration's document entitled   Cosmetic Good Manufacturing Practice Guidelines or contact the  Canadian Cosmetic, Toiletry and Fragrance Association.

How Reliable Are Manufacturer Claims and Advertisements?

Claims for a cosmetic on a label or in an advertisement must be accurate so that they do not mislead the public. Since certain claims, such as increased attractiveness or increased masculinity, can only be judged subjectively, some puffery (exaggeration of a kind which does not mislead the public) is tolerated. However, be doubtful of any therapeutic claims on a label that does not have a Drug Identification Number (DIN) or Natural Product Number (NPN) associated with it. Therapeutic claims are not acceptable for cosmetic products.

Radio or television advertising is previewed and cleared with Advertising Standards Canada before it is broadcast. Printed advertisements do not require pre-clearance review. Instead, a selection of popular Canadian magazines and newspapers are monitored and if an advertisement does not conform with the Regulations, the advertiser is asked to change or withdraw it.


arge numbers of aging "baby-boomers" will continue to die in the short term from smoking-related causes, reflecting the growth and age of the Canadian population as well as past smoking behaviour., It is expected that current tobacco control efforts will reverse this trend.

Not only are fewer Canadians smoking, but they are also smoking fewer cigarettes on a daily basis. According to the latest results from the 2002 Canadian Tobacco Use Monitoring Survey (CTUMS), an estimated 21% of the population aged, 15 years and older, were smokers. This is a slight decrease from the 2001 rate of 22%. In 1985, daily smokers consumed an average of 20.6 cigarettes per day. Since then, the number of cigarettes smoked has been gradually declining to the current level of 16.4 cigatettes per day reported for 2002.

Health Canada is the lead department for the FTCS which has, to date, been one of the most successful and cost effective tobacco control programs in the world. Since the beginning of the Strategy in 2001, approximately 300,000 smokers have quit. In addition, approximately 120,000 fewer teenagers have taken up smoking. If nothing else changes, by 2050, this will result in over 150,000 fewer smoking related deaths.

The total coordinate difference between WGS84(G730) and NAD83 in Canada amounted to approximately 1-1.5 m with a magnitude and direction varying according to user location.

The Supreme Court has tended to view privacy in its emanation as a human right, a Charter protected value. Some tensions exist in the natural course of events and the Supreme Court has become the forum for sorting the tension out: how to effect a balance between Canadians reasonable expectation of privacy, a right guaranteed implicitly by the Charter and the counter interests of the state, such as law enforcement.

There are also counter interests in the private sector such as the profitability of marketing Canadians' personal information. These interests are not typically addressed through the Charter, as you may know, because the Charter limits state action and does not regulate the practices of private enterprise directly (although I must say that the Supreme Court has not been disinclined to adopt a greater dimension of what constitutes state action).

In any event, the State is still one of the largest purveyors of personal information, that in itself causes tension: the State is charged with responsibility under the Privacy Act to protect data at the same time as it collects and uses it. That is why the Courts, particularly the Supreme Court, have come to play such a pivotal role in the protection of privacy.

A variety of Charter provisions provide protection to privacy values:

Section 2 protects individuals' abilities to decide personal beliefs and opinions.
Section 10 gives individuals a right to legal counsel and the courts have interpreted that to mean counsel in private.
Sections 11 and 13 provide the right against self-incrimination.
These are all rights which protect informational privacy by controlling the way information is collected and used. Section 7 provides a right not to be deprived of life, liberty and security of the person, except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. This is at least suggestive of privacy protection. But it is section 8 of the Charter - the protection against unreasonable search and seizure - which has been the most valuable for privacy advocates. Despite the lack of a specifically entrenched right to privacy in the Charter, the Supreme Court has accorded privacy constitutional protection as a fundamental human right via primarily section 8. It's worth having a closer look at some of these Supreme Court of Canada decisions because they can provide tools for advancing privacy.

In Lawson Hunter et al. v. Southam Inc., the Supreme Court stated that a major purpose of the constitutional protection against unreasonable search and seizure under section 8 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms was the protection of the privacy of the individual.

The case involved a constitutional challenge to a search conducted under the Combines Investigation Act. The Court concluded that to assess the constitutionality of a search, it must focus on the search's reasonableness or unreasonableness in terms of its impact on the individual and not simply on its rationality in furthering a valid government objective. Mr. Justice Dickson of the Supreme Court advanced in this case for the first time the precept of reasonable expectation of privacy as a standard against which government action should be scrutinized. The difficulty is this test of reasonable expectation has led to a certain lack of precision in its application by the Court as we'll see in a minute.

In R. v. Stewart, a union seeking to organize the employees of a certain hotel, hired Mr. Stewart to obtain the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the hotel's employees. Mr. Stewart contacted the hotel security guard and offered to purchase the information. The guard refused as he knew he was not authorized to access that information through the hotel records and that the hotel had previously refused to give that same information to the union. Mr. Stewart was charged with counselling to commit fraud and theft.

After an acquittal at trial, the Court of Appeal entered a conviction on the charge. The Supreme Court allowed the appeal on the basis that confidential information does not qualify as property, at least for the purposes of the Criminal Code and that Mr. Stewart's conduct did not amount to fraud as it did not involve a risk of economic loss amounting to deprivation. (But that's not the important part.) Cory J.A., as he then was, suggested that information and its collection, collation and interpretation are so vital to modern enterprises that it may be considered their most valuable asset. He then concluded that the confidential or private nature of the information is exactly what gives it its proprietary interest.

Picking up on that theme, Mr. Justice Lamer, as he then was in the Supreme Court (he is now Chief Justice) acknowledged that, "... given recent technological developments, confidential information, and in some instances, information of a commercial value, is in need of some protection" but he considered that this was best left to Parliament.

Some six months later, Mr. Justice Lamer had an opportunity to revisit these notions in R. Dyment. In that case, decided before amendments to the Criminal Code dealing with blood samples, a doctor drew a blood sample from an emergency patient without his consent or knowledge in order to provide medical treatment and later gave it to a police officer for his investigation.

The sample was used to secure a conviction of impaired driving. Mr. Justice Lamer found that the blood was held by the doctor subject to a duty to respect the patient's privacy; and Mr. Justice La Forest found that the officer breached the respondent's privacy interests in the sample and so effected a seizure within the meaning of section 8 of the Charter of Rights. This case is often cited for identifying the three types of privacy: physical, territorial and informational. Actually, as the Court pointed out, these categories were first identified in a 1972 joint study by the Federal Department of Justice and the Department of Communications. The Court accepted that the notion of privacy derives from the assumption that all information about a person is in a fundamental way, his own.

Two years later, in R. v. Duarte, Mr. Justice La Forest had occasion to review the police practice of consent surveillance i.e. electronic surveillance without a court authorization where one of the parties to a conversation, an undercover police officer, surreptitiously records it. He reinforced the precept that the Charter standard for privacy is set at a reasonable expectation of privacy and that the particular police practice of audio-surveillance failed to meet that standard.

In the same year as Duarte, Mr. Justice LaForest wrote the majority reasons in a case involving unauthorized videotape surveillance of a hotel room. In R. v. Wong, he again stressed the need to interpret the individual's reasonable expectation of privacy in light of the social importance of privacy. In other words, the question for him should always be framed in a neutral manner, whether in a society such as ours, persons who retire to a hotel room and close the door have a reasonable expectation of privacy.

The trouble is Mr. Justice LaForest has a different way of applying the test from other members of the Court. He feels the Court must consider the reasonable expectation in the context of a free and democratic society, i.e. without reference to the illegal activity of the particular person. Mr. Justice Sopinka, on the other hand, and also Mr. Justice Lamer, appear to feel that the Court must evaluate the expectation in light of what a reasonable person placed in those circumstances could expect. For example, in R. v. Plant, Mr. Justice Sopinka wrote the Court's majority judgment which considered the individual's privacy interest in computerized utility records. He set out some five considerations to be used by the Court when determining whether or not the individual's expectation of privacy had been violated.

In this case, Calgary Police received a tip that an individual was growing marijuana in his house. They conducted a search of his electricity records held in the computer of the city's utility commission, using a remote terminal in the police station with a password given to them by the utility. They discovered in this manner that the house used four times the average amount of electricity, but typical use for a marijuana operation. Eventually, the owner was charged and convicted and the matter went up to the Supreme Court where it was argued that the warrantless search of the owner's computerized records violated his reasonable expectation of privacy under section 8 of the Charter.

The Supreme Court rejected the claim. Justice Sopinka set out his factors for applying the reasonable expectation test: one must consider the nature of the information itself, the nature of the relationship between the party releasing the information and the party claiming its confidentiality, the place where the information was obtained, the manner in which it was obtained, and the seriousness of the crime being investigated. These factors, he felt, would properly allow for a balancing of the societal interest in protecting individual dignity, integrity and autonomy with effective law enforcement.

Under the last factor, he concluded that the seriousness of the accused's offence in this case suggested that the accused could not reasonably have a privacy interest which outweighed the state's interest in law enforcement. In a short but powerful dissent, Madame Justice McLachlin disagreed with the conclusion that police were free to search the database without a warrant. The proper question for her was whether the evidence disclosed a reasonable expectation that the information would be kept in confidence and used only for the purpose for which it was given.

This Justice, in the use of this kind of language, certainly appears to have read the Privacy Act!. Electricity records, she said, were close to the line but they deserved protection because they could reveal information about the individual's private life. She writes in her judgment:

"The records are capable of telling much about one's personal lifestyle, such as how many people lived in the house and what sort of activities were probably taking place there. The records tell a story about what is happening inside a private dwelling, the most private of all places. I think the reasonable person looking at these facts would conclude that the records should be used only for the purpose for which they were made, the delivery and billing for electricity, and not to be divulged to strangers without proper legal authorization."
In a speech which Mr. Justice Sopinka gave in September this year entitled "Freedom of Speech and Privacy in the Information Age", he spoke of his approach in the Plant case. He told the audience:

"The ease with which personal information can now be assimilated makes it possible for 'big brother' to be watching us. Unlike freedom of speech, there is no explicit right to privacy guaranteed under the Charter. However, s. 8, which provides everyone with the right against unreasonable search and seizure, is grounded in the right to privacy. The test for its application against government surveillance is the existence of a reasonable expectation of privacy. The more accessible the information about an individual, the less is his or her expectation of privacy. In recent years, a story appeared in the Ottawa newspapers that the police in the course of scanning bulletin boards detected a posting by a parolee which they believed showed that he had travelled to the U.S. in breach of his parole. The subject had obtained gainful employment in a car dealership, but was fired when the police arrested him. It turned out the police has misinterpreted the information.
In order to make out a breach of s. 8, our parole car salesman would have to distinguish R. v. Plant. In that case, we had to consider whether it was constitutionally permissible for the police to use its computer records of the electrical consumption at a specified address in order to determine whether or not it was likely that marijuana was being grown at the house, since this is often characterized by a higher than normal consumption of electricity. I observed that the 'Charter should seek to protect a biographical core of personal information which individuals in a free and democratic society would wish to maintain and control from dissemination to the state'. It could be said that information revealing a pattern of electricity consumption would fall into such a category. However, each case must be decided on its own facts, carefully analyzing the extent to which respect for one's personal privacy and dignity has been violated."

So there is on the one hand Justice Sopinka, a rather narrow contextualization of privacy and on the other, Justice La Forest, a much broader context.

Justice La Forest has, on occasion, in fact gone much further in pursuing privacy protection than the rest of the Court. In Edmonton Journal v. Alta (A.G.), the Court examined the rights of individuals to protect their privacy as against the right of newspapers to report on court proceedings. At issue was a provision of the Alberta Judicature Act which limited the publication of information relating to matrimonial cases. In his dissent, Justice La Forest concluded that, although freedom of expression and the need for open courts are important interests, the general publication of details of private family cases serves insufficient public interest and the limitation should stand. Most interestingly, in this case, it was recognized that the privacy of individuals is not only threatened by the interference of government but also by other powerful entities, such as the media, against which an individual is powerless.

More recently, the Court has extended the notion of privacy into that of reputation, perhaps opening the door to successful claims in damages for invasion of privacy. In Morris Manning and Church of Scientology of Toronto, Mr. Justice Cory stated:

"... reputation is intimately related to the right to privacy which has been accorded constitutional protection. As La Forest J. wrote in R. v. Dyment, 'privacy, including informational privacy, is [g]rounded in man's physical and moral autonomy and is essential for the well-being of the individual'. The publication of defamatory comments constitutes an invasion of the individual's personal privacy and is an affront to that person's dignity. The protection of a person's reputation is indeed worthy of protection in our democratic society ..."
This notion that the Charter is concerned not only with the protection of property but also the protection of privacy could be an extremely valuable one. Speaking before the Canadian Human Rights foundation in 1990, Mr. Justice LaForest suggested that "it is with the adoption of section 8 of the Charter that a privacy doctrine has truly developed". However, as Mr. Justice Sopinka has more recently re-iterated on the subject, "... It [the Charter] only applies to government action. Given that much of the world of electronic communication is controlled privately, without any government regulation, the Charter may be an ineffective tool ..."

So, if the Charter is a less than precise and a limited vehicle for privacy protection in the Supreme Court, how about Parliament? How about legislation as a better vehicle for privacy? The first case to reach the Supreme Court of Canada involving the interpretation of the Privacy Act, was the Dagg decision. Mr. Dagg wanted access under the Access to Information Act, to information in weekend log-in sheets of public servants. There is a mandatory exemption to access under the Access Act for other individuals' personal information. At trial, the two issues of interest to the Privacy Commissioner were the interpretation of the definition of personal information and the relative status of the Access Act to the Privacy Act.

Justice Cullen at the Trial level imported a new ingredient to the definition of personal information: a test of predominance. The information had to be predominantly personal in nature. Further, he suggested the Privacy Act is secondary in interest to the Access Act! Accordingly, the Privacy Commissioner intervened at the Federal Court of Appeal where the predominance test was rejected, the equality of the two statutes was restored and Mr. Dagg was denied the information.

At the Supreme Court of Canada, the Court of Appeal judgment was affirmed insofar as the two issues of importance to the Privacy Commissioner were concerned. However, Mr. Dagg obtained the information as it fell within a proper exception to the definition of personal information in the Privacy Act.

The Court was split 5 to 4, as has been mentioned. The majority judgment was written by Mr. Justice Cory and was concurred in by Chief Justice Lamer and Justice Sopinka - not a surprise in view of what we have heard about Justice Sopinka's approach to the reasonable expectation of privacy test, and by Madam Justice McLachlin, more surprisingly in view of her strong dissent in the Plant case. The dissent reasons were written by Mr. Justice La Forest. The majority and the minority decisions differ only on the meaning of s. 3(j) of the Privacy Act, i.e. does the type of personal information which appeared on overtime log-in sheets relate more or less to the position and function of the public servants? La Forest J. felt less, Sopinka J. and his group, more.

La Forest J. considered that the information revealed the times during which employees attended at their workplace on weekends and that therefore it was personal information about them. He accepted that there were numerous legitimate reasons why individuals may not wish members of the public to have access to their comings and goings.

It is difficult to discern a clear rationale behind the majority's decision that the information fell within the exception to the definition of personal information. Justice Cory simply said:

"Although this information may not disclose anything about the nature of the responsibilities of the position, it does provide a general indication of the extent of those responsibilities. Generally, the more work demanded of the employee, the longer will be the hours of work required to complete it in order to fulfil 'the responsibilities of the position held by the individual'. Nothing in s.3(j)(iii) of the Act indicates that the information must refer to 'responsibilities' in a qualitative, as opposed to quantitative, sense."
It is not really persuasive. To my mind, two things were really driving the majority - Firstly, the background to s. 8 of the Charter where the justices were generally true to their own previous interpretations and secondly, the relatively greater public understanding and knowledge of the Access to Information Act compared to the Privacy Act.

There are a number of cases which could be carried up to the Supreme Court where privacy will be more squarely faced off against not only the historically competing interests like law enforcement but those of judicial independence and governance issues. These will test the waters because they raise interests which the Court has traditionally protected.

One respondent suggested that due to the nature of NON-prescription drug submissions, where there is no contact with TPD until a final decision has been made, a process should be implemented whereby a NON-prescription drug sponsor has the opportunity to resolve the dispute with either the Director or Division Chief of the responsible area before having to file an intent to commence the formal dispute resolution process. 

DRC Discussion and Recommendation: External panels cannot always be used in the reconsideration as not all matters are appropriate for referral externally. For example, for regulatory issues the experts would be lawyers, not scientists. The formation of a panel will be the favoured option if feasible, however it cannot be automatic. No change made.

The Senior Medical Advisor Bureau is working to improve communication with sponsors of NON-prescription drug submissions. Even in situations where they are not contacted about their submissions, sponsors always have the option of contacting the Directorate. Dispute prevention and early resolution measures such as teleconferences or post-Notice meetings are available for all submissions, including NON-prescription submissions. A Regulatory Project Manager has been assigned to the NON-prescription Drug Evaluation Division, and consideration is being given to assigning a similar resource to DIN submissions.

Two respondents suggested that the timeline for the sponsor to submit a Letter of Intent be increased to 30 calendar days. There was concern that due to the fact that it takes several days to receive the review reports, the allotted time would be insufficient to allow sponsors the time to obtain the necessary approvals to proceed with the formal process.

The Office of the Commissioner for Aquaculture Development was established by the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans in December of 1998 to provide advice to the Minister on matters pertaining to aquaculture in Canada. The Commissioner was asked to be the champion for aquaculture within the federal government and to accelerate the implementation of the Federal Aquaculture Development Strategy (FADS), launched in 1995 by the Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO).

After a first three-year mandate, during which he released a report entitled "Legislative and Regulatory Review of Aquaculture in Canada", the Commissioner was given an extended two-year mandate (until March 2004) to prepare a long-term vision for aquaculture in Canada and to provide the Minister with specific recommendations on the appropriate federal role to help achieve this vision and fully implement the FADS.

This report outlines the rationale for further investment in the development of a sustainable aquaculture industry in Canada, discusses environmental criticisms and presents a 15-year vision. It concludes with observations on what needs to be done to overcome short and long-term constraints and impediments that keep Canada from achieving its full potential in aquaculture.

During the process of producing this report, we met with many Canadians in all regions of the country. We asked for their input into the formulation of a vision for aquaculture and we were pleased and impressed with their contribution. We also conducted numerous studies, which can be found on our web site: /aquaculture/library/index_e.htm

We encourage readers to consult these studies to learn more about the aquaculture industry in Canada and internationally.

The opinions expressed in this report are solely those of the Commissioner for Aquaculture Development.


There is no doubt that aquaculture activities practised on this minuscule portion of our aquatic ecosystem produce a certain level of environmental impacts. But an objective and strategic assessment of these environmental impacts cannot be done without taking into account the fact that the approach used to produce the other 75 percent of the value of Canadian fish and seafood landings the commercial fisheries also has an environmental cost.

The reality is that aquaculture produces a new fish biomass with a certain level of impact on a small, localized portion of our aquatic ecosystem, while commercial fisheries remove large amounts of wild biomass from the ecosystem with a certain level of impact on a large portion of the same ecosystem.

In fact, aquaculture should be viewed as a good candidate to become a model of sustainable development, contributing towards the long-term protection of Canadian aquatic ecosystems.

Facts and Myths about Environmental Impacts from Shellfish Aquaculture
The culture of mussels, oysters and clams in Canada is generally considered to pose a low environmental risk. Molluscs are filter feeders, and their presence in an environment is often used as an indicator of the quality of the environment. By removing suspended particles, molluscs can contribute towards improving the quality of the environment in areas or bays.

Due to the fact that they extract their food from the surrounding environment, it is important to consider the carrying capacity of a specific area when siting mollusc culture operations. If not properly sited and monitored, large-scale operations could have consequences on water circulation, sedimentation regime and accumulation of organic material on the bottom of the ocean. Most shellfish operations are well sited, adequately regulated and of a small enough production to avoid such problems.

Most of the opposition to mollusc aquaculture is based more on conflicts with other users than on environmental considerations. The leasing of private mollusc culture tenures is often viewed by other users as an infringement on their rights, e.g. public access to water for land owners, general access to beaches for citizens, the right to navigation for all types of boaters, access to the resource for fishers, pristine views for cottage owners, etc. This not-inmy- back-yard syndrome can be overcome through pro-active planning of aquaculture sites, and comprehensive and transparent consultation processes and conflict resolution mechanisms.

Facts and Myths about Environmental Impacts from Finfish Aquaculture
Salmon farming has been the object of criticism in Canada over the last two years. Many of these criticisms are unfounded and are not based on recent data on the environmental performance of the salmon farming industry while other criticisms are valid.

The Salmon Aquaculture Review, published in 1997, was a comprehensive and independent review of all of the environmental risks that are due to salmon farming. It concluded that salmon farming, as currently practised in BC and at current levels, presents a low overall risk to the environment. Since the publication of the Review, many other reports, analysing the same basic environmental risks, have been done on the same subject.

Table 1 in Appendix I summarizes the results of two credible, comprehensive and recent papers on the magnitude of the environmental risks involved with the practice of salmon farming, and compares these with the results of the Salmon Aquaculture Review.

In summary, Table 1 shows that many environmental concerns are based on outdated information or old practices and technologies, or have been exaggerated. At the same time, the table highlights other environmental concerns that are legitimate and require immediate attention by government and industry.

Some critics have raised the issue of the large amount of fish meal and fish oil being used in the composition of fish feed and consequently contributing to further depletion of the oceans and removal of valuable fish resources for human consumption. The reality is that the fisheries responsible for the production of fish oil and fish meal are stable and sustainable, and are based on fish that were never used for direct human consumption. Aquaculture uses only about one third of available fish meal and fish oil; the rest is used for other livestock production, such as poultry and pork, as well as for pet food.

Concerns have also been expressed about genetically modified (GM) fish being raised in Canadian waters. The reality is that there are no GM fish in commercial production in Canada. Moreover, the Canadian Aquaculture Industry Alliance has a clear policy against the use of GM fish in commercial production until it has been scientifically demonstrated that they are fully safe for consumers and the environment. The only GM fish raised in Canada are in completely contained, landbased research facilities and are used for a variety of research projects, including the possible use of these fish for the production of insulin for humans.

Overall, sustainability resides in developing best management practices and government policies and regulations to reduce to an acceptable level all potential environmental impacts resulting from open net cage finfish culture operations, and to carefully locate these activities in well planned and well managed aquaculture areas or zones.

How Industry and Government Policies and Regulations Address Environmental Concerns
Regulating a private activity in public waters is a highly complex challenge, and requires new approaches. A number of measures have either been implemented or are in the process of implementation, the goal being to improve the environmental performance of the aquaculture industry in Canada. The implementation of these measures within a short timeframe is a clear reflection of the commitment of the aquaculture sector to address environmental concerns. It also illustrates the importance attached by both levels of government to environmental concerns.

Furthermore, the specific recommendations issuing from this report will complete the overall set of federal, provincial, and industry measures already established to protect the environment. New measures may be required to set the (federal) compliance standards for conducting aquaculture in Canada when it comes to environmental sustainability. These rules should be consistent with recommendations submitted in June 2000 in the report entitled "Legislative and Regulatory Review of Aquaculture in Canada".

The government's framework for managing environmental risk needs to be flexible enough to take into consideration the realities of scarce enforcement resources, a rapidly evolving sector and constantly changing technologies and practices. Many existing and proposed measures have been designed in the context of risk management, smart regulation and adaptive management approaches. We must consider new approaches that involve the industry, while ensuring that adequate government monitoring, regulation and enforcement continues to exist to ensure full compliance and that sanctions are imposed when necessary.

It is essential to highlight the fact that each aquaculture operation in Canada (except shellfish bottom-seeding where there is no physical change to the seabed) must undergo an environmental assessment under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) before being granted federal approval. In combination with ongoing federal and provincial environmental monitoring programs, aquaculture projects being subjected to environmental assessments ensure that no unforeseen, significant negative consequences on the environment arise from aquaculture operations.

In summary, although this industry is young (30 years old or less), it has already demonstrated a high level of environmental stewardship and has significantly improved its environmental performance in recent years. Although ongoing improvement is still needed in some areas, this sector has become a model of sustainable development that meets the highest environmental standards.

Back to Top

PART TWO

AQUACULTURE IN CANADA, WHAT IS HOLDING US BACK?
For 20 years, since the first National Aquaculture Conference sponsored by DFO and the Science Council of Canada in 1983, aquaculture has been regarded as a significant and sustainable economic development opportunity for Canadians. This remains the situation today. At that conference, it was specifically noted that "A more proactive role for governments [in aquaculture] was advocated|12|." For 20 years, however, reality has fallen well short of the vision. And why has this been the case in Canada but not in other, similar countries?

Since 1983, many national initiatives have been announced by the federal government to support aquaculture development, starting in 1984 with the determination of DFO as the lead federal agency for aquaculture by the Prime Minister. In 1986, federal and provincial Fisheries Ministers agreed on a statement of national goals and principles for the development of aquaculture.

Between 1986 and 1989, the federal commitment resulted in the signature of MOU's with the provinces on respective responsibilities with regard to aquaculture development. In 1988, the Standing Committee on Fisheries and Oceans launched a report entitled Aquaculture in Canada which recommended that the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans take a proactive role in supporting aquaculture development in Canada. In 1990, DFO launched a Strategy for the Development of Aquaculture.

After two national aquaculture planning forums had been held, in 1995, DFO launched the Federal Aquaculture Development Strategy (FADS) with the support and collaboration of the provincial governments, 17 federal departments and agencies, and all stakeholders.

With the FADS, the federal government reconfirmed DFO as the lead federal agency and specified that this lead federal role was two-fold: regulatory and development. In preparation for the1997 election, the Liberal government announced a Red Book commitment for federal support to aquaculture that led to the creation of a commissioner for aquaculture development in 1998.

Meanwhile, since 1983, the federal government has, through various programs, invested significant financial resources in aquaculture.

Despite much good effort and some successes, it is fair to say that the federal government has been unable to achieve for the sector all that was expected. Despite its enormous biophysical potential, Canada continues to lag behind other countries in aquaculture growth. Many of our key markets are under pressure from countries such as Chile, where aquaculture has been embraced and supported by the national government.

The current regulatory approach for aquaculture is being challenged by many stakeholders. This approach has not garnered public confidence, nor has DFO been able to sustain its costs. The industry is finding that the costs of supplying information and meeting regulatory requirements are high compared to other countries. More importantly, the lack of predictability and consistency of the process makes it difficult for investors to justify investing in Canada.

Other federal departments with an interest in aquaculture development are becoming concerned over the apparent confusing signals that the federal government is giving. We support the growth of the industry, but we make it difficult to obtain new sites.

The legislated mandate of DFO is to conserve wild stocks and to protect the marine environment. This mandate is constitutionally enshrined. It is what Canadians expect. The department has been wrestling with the development role described in the Federal Aquaculture Development Strategy. Aquaculture has been somewhat of an orphan within the department, under- resourced and never fully understood. Indeed, aquaculture has been at the centre of an internal conflict within DFO for some time.

Perhaps we must ask whether the federal government is taking the correct approach with respect to this industry. In many other sectors, the federal government has been clear in its desire and ability to support growth. We have seen major public investments in biotechnology, aerospace, communications, and agriculture to name a few, combined with the appropriate programming. This has not been the case for aquaculture. We continue to treat this industry as a subset of the fishery rather than as the agri-food business that it is. The principal federal environmental regulator of the industry has been asked to be responsible for leading the growth and development of the industry.

It is time to re-assess past decisions. Having said this, it is clear that DFO will always play an important role in the evolution of the aquaculture industry. DFO bears the brunt of the federal responsibility for ensuring (and convincing Canadians) that aquaculture is environmentally sustainable. This is an enormously important responsibility and one to which the department has directed considerable effort. Due to these efforts, we are close to the point at which the environmental rules of the game will be finalized. Since most of our competitors are wrestling with the same issues surrounding environmental protection, Canada will come out of this process well placed to be a world leader in environmental protection.

However, we need more than good environmental protection regulations. We need an overall policy approach that recognizes the farming nature of aquaculture, combined with equitable and affordable programming that responds to the developmental needs of the sector.

Back to Top

12.   Pritchard, G.I. (1984). Preface - Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference: Strategies for Aquaculture Development in Canada. Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. & Aquat. Sci. 75

PART THREE

GETTING THE POLICY RIGHT
Aquaculture is a farming not fishing industry. Aquaculturists own their stocks and operate on private or leased properties. Aquaculture is a modern agrifood business that has very little in common with wild fisheries (a hunting type of activity), except for the fact that the farming medium is water and that saltwater aquaculture is practised in a coastal environment that belongs to the common property of all Canadians.

It can be argued that the origin of aquaculture in Canada is closely related to fisheries. Early in Canadian history, fisheries officers used aquaculture techniques to improve the success of reproduction or the survival rate of juveniles in support of several commercial fisheries species. The release of hatchery-raised salmon smolts on both coasts of Canada to increase wild production is a good illustration of the fisheries origin of Canadian aquaculture.

This interest of the fisheries sector in increasing artificially wild populations of commercial species has also contributed to the creation of a strong R&D interest among fisheries scientists. Over the years, Canadian fisheries researchers have developed an expertise in hatchery techniques, nutrition and fish health, resulting in a strong aquaculture science domain within the fisheries sector. It is well known that an important part of the science used to develop the huge salmon farming industry in Norway came from Canadian fisheries scientists.

These facts help explain, in 1984, why the Canadian government assigned to DFO the responsibility of being the lead federal agency for aquaculture. At that time, it was clear that all the federal aquaculture expertise resided in DFO and that there was a genuine interest within the department to develop the sector.

Unfortunately, in the 1990's, DFO initiated a long process of policy re-orientation that resulted in key policy decisions which had significant impact on the development of aquaculture in Canada. The department went through a series of program reviews and policy orientation exercises that led to a strong refocusing of the departmental mandate towards the conservation of wild stocks.

This focus on conservation has provoked an intense internal debate within DFO over the legitimacy of supporting the development of a sector (aquaculture) that could have a negative impact on the wild stocks. Another key consequence of the department's decision to reduce its focus on aquaculture has been that Canadian public policy on aquaculture is now derived directly from fisheries policy, which is unable to take into account the unique nature of water farming.

Aquaculture is a modern agri-food business in urgent need of an agri-food approach and expertise that will better understand its needs and support its development. It is clear that, in the Canadian context, the environmental sustainability of the sector is a key cornerstone for any further development, and that DFO is ideally positioned to help this industry to become a model of sustainable development and an activity which is well regarded by all Canadians.

But it is equally important to recognize that, beyond this environmental sustainability challenge, aquaculture faces many other challenges, the most important ones being fish health, food safety, farm risk management, innovation, marketing and trade.

Aquaculture exists in a very competitive international environment and it is of paramount importance that Canadian aquaculturists are adequately equipped to compete on a level playing field. Canadian aquaculturists must be treated as farmers and food producers requiring agronomists, veterinarians, nutritionists and geneticists to understand their needs and support the development of their industry.

The new Agriculture Policy Framework (APF) announced by the Prime Minister in June of 2002 is aimed at rejuvenating both the federal and provincial policies and management of the agriculture sector, in order to help Canadian farmers face today's new challenges.

The APF is built upon five themes:

Business risk management
Food safety and food quality
Science and innovation
Environment
Renewal
Each of these themes forms the basis for new or existing programming. In order to ensure that both levels of government are working towards these common goals, a new APF Agreement was negotiated between Canada and the provinces and territories during 2003. The Minister of Agriculture and Agri-food Canada is negotiating specific Implementation Agreements with each province and territory. One of the main objectives of the new APF is to help Canada increase its share of international markets. As a major food (including seafood) exporting country, increased international market shares should translate into increased wealth for Canada. Central to this objective is the notion of "branding Canada," that is, ensuring that all elements of our food production system are sustainable and capable of producing safe, wholesome food for our export markets.

The current needs of the aquaculture sector are closely aligned with the themes announced in the APF. Moreover, one can argue that some elements of the APF, e.g. food safety and branding of Canadian food in international markets, could be at risk if fish products are excluded from this initiative.

In summary, although the regulatory role of DFO is of paramount importance in securing public confidence in aquaculture and helping the industry earn its social license, it is urgent that the federal government recognize the agriculture nature of aquaculture and establish a public policy and regulatory environment that distinguishes aquaculture from fisheries and that establishes the rights of aquaculturists to manage their private stocks according to agronomy principles and market forces instead of having to follow regulations aimed at controlling public fisheries. It is important to understand that provisions of the Fisheries Act to protect fish habitat and provisions of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act would continue to apply to aquaculture in order to ensure that aquaculture operations are conducted in an environmentally safe manner.

The following three points are key to the identification of an appropriate policy response to the issue of confidence that is facing the federal government:

The fact that 34 federal departments and agencies are involved either directly or indirectly in aquaculture clearly demonstrates the need to implement a horizontal approach to the management of aquaculture within the federal system.
Aquaculture is also a shared jurisdiction in Canada and thus requires an effective and permanent federal/provincial/territorial planning, harmonization and management mechanism.
Aquaculture products are food, and thus require a modern agriculture-based approach with regard to on-farm food safety, production management, farm risk management, quality assurance and marketing.
An Appropriate Federal Role in Aquaculture
As a private enterprise, it is industry's role to develop internationally competitive and commercially successful aquaculture ventures. However, government policies and programs shape the environment in which industry operates and thus can significantly influence the scope and pace of industry growth and competitiveness. With a view to generating wealth and employment opportunities for Canadians, governments act as a catalyst to create a business environment in which aquaculture can flourish, while simultaneously upholding mandated responsibilities to safeguard public health and navigational safety, and to protect the environment. Such a role is consistent with current federal policy as outlined in the Federal Aquaculture Development Strategy, the 2002 Speech from the Throne and other cabinet directives pertaining to the development of a strong and sustainable Canadian economy.

As a newer agri-food sector, however, sustainable aquaculture development is constrained by policies, regulations and legislation that were developed largely for fisheries management and which cannot effectively accommodate the nuances of aquaculture. Consequently, delineation of a more appropriate federal role in aquaculture is required.

For all economic sectors, the "enabling" role of government necessitates striking an effective balance between regulation and development. From a regulatory perspective, the federal government is mandated to uphold human health and safety and environmental integrity. For example, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) must continue to provide assurances to consumers in domestic and export markets that Canadian fish and seafood is safe and wholesome. Similarly, Environment Canada and DFO must maintain public confidence in our capacity to ensure that activities are conducted in a manner that will not compromise the integrity of coastal and freshwater resources, and that the Coast Guard maintains public safety on our waterways. Should public confidence in the government's ability to effectively provide such safeguards erode, sustainable development will be compromized.

Moreover, the aquaculture sector itself is dependent upon these very safeguards. In the absence of healthy and productive aquatic ecosystems, aquaculture productivity and competitiveness are compromised. Without safe, navigable waterways, the security of aquaculture stocks is compromised. If consumers cannot be assured that products are safe and wholesome, markets are compromised. Hence, governments and aquaculturists are natural allies in the effort to develop and implement measures that enhance sustainability.

The responsibility for realizing aquaculture's considerable potential lies with industry, while the government is responsible for providing industry with an enabling policy and regulatory framework, supported by a modern administrative system in which expertise and capacity are adapted to the needs of the sector. By providing a balanced federal response to aquaculture, Canada benefits from a more effective and efficient public service for the regulation and development of the sector, enabling it to realize its potential as a sustainable supplier of farm-raised fish, shellfish and aquatic plants and as a revitalizing force for coastal and rural economies. Effective and efficient delivery of these complementary roles across a multitude of federal departments and agencies requires a coordinated and integrated federal response.

A Vision for Sustainable Aquaculture Development in Canada
During the summer of 2002, OCAD organized eleven regional workshops with industry, government and other stakeholders to solicit the perspectives of those groups that are most directly involved with aquaculture development in Canada. These collective views were compiled into a cohesive Vision for Sustainable Aquaculture Development in Canada.

Aquaculture is an environmentally sustainable food production sector that enhances the value and productivity of Canada's fish and seafood sector. By producing wholesome products that exceed consumer expectations for taste, quality and convenience in domestic and international markets and by applying prudent production practices, Canada's aquaculture industry continues to attract investment to sustain growth and diversification. Operating in an enabling policy and regulatory environment, the sector brings sustainable economic and social revitalization to coastal and rural communities in a manner that is respectful of Aboriginal rights and traditional ways of life. Recognizing the significant societal benefits of aquaculture development, the Government of Canada has made it a key federal priority. Canada will fulfill its potential as a competitive force in sustainable aquaculture development.

A vision without action is merely wishful thinking. The visioning exercise also clarified which elements were deemed to be fundamental to the successful development of the aquaculture sector in Canada. If acted upon, the eleven strategic elements identified will allow the vision to be achieved. Each element represents a high-level component of the vision that, ultimately, will require strategic focus for further implementation.

The elements identified are: Environmental Sustainability; Integrated Management; Policy, Legislation and Regulation; Aboriginal Peoples and Aquaculture Development; Research and Technology Exploitation; Finance, Industry Development and Infrastructure; Marketing and Trade; Food Safety; Aquatic Animal Health; Training and Education; and, Communications. Readers should refer to the Commissioner's public report entitled, Achieving the Vision for a full discussion of these elements.

Specific Recommendations
Based upon the results of the visioning exercise and an analysis of the potential for aquaculture in Canada based on a number of background studies, a set of specific recommendations has been developed that if followed, will go a long way to restoring Canada as an important aquaculture nation. These recommendations encompass three main themes or pillars:

Pillar One - Environmental Standards, Regulatory Change and Reporting Mechanism
Pillar Two - New Framework for Enhanced Federal/Provincial/Territorial Delivery of Aquaculture in Canada
Pillar Three - Funding
Pillar One - Environmental Standards, Regulatory Change and Reporting Mechanism
Long-term legal access to sites of sufficient scale to enable industry to be internationally competitive is the single most important factor limiting future expansion of aquaculture in Canada. Shared governmental jurisdiction over aquaculture activities, together with a complex legal framework and the recent emergence of the sector as a commercial reality, has too often resulted in a site-application review process that is inefficient, unpredictable and costly for all parties involved. New approaches must be found that make the environmental assessment process more predictable without sacrificing its effectiveness.

By establishing, in law, acceptable standards for the environmental impacts of aquaculture, the federal government will achieve three important goals. First, it will provide clarity to farm operators as to how to conduct their businesses. This will remove the ever present threat of possible prosecution and contribute towards better collaboration between industry and regulators. Second, the standards will demonstrate to a concerned public that the federal government has listened to their concerns for better protection for the aquatic environment. Public concern has been a major preoccupation of the Auditor General and the Standing Committee on Fisheries and Oceans, among others. Third, it will increase the international competitiveness of Canada's aquaculture industry. All of Canada's competitors are faced with similar problems with respect to public concern over environmental protection. By "getting it right," Canada will be seen as a world leader in sustainable aquaculture production and this will translate into sales opportunities.

Adjustments of the provincial regulations to the Fisheries Act are also being recommended to ensure that there is consistency of application across the country. This is not the case at present.

This report also proposes the development of new tools to help DFO Habitat officers, as well as applicants, complete the environmental assessment process more efficiently.

Recommendation 1

It is recommended that the federal government establish regulations pursuant to S. 36 of the Fisheries Act to authorize the deposition of deleterious substances in relation to aquaculture operations under prescribed circumstances and protocols.

Recommendation 2

It is recommended that the federal government, recognizing the time frame associated with regulatory measures, establish interim guidelines for the deposition of deleterious substances utilized within the aquaculture sector, based on knowledge currently available in Canada and in other jurisdictions. Such guidelines could be implemented via Standard Operating Practices (SOP) or Codes of Practice (COP), adherence to which would be a mandatory condition of securing a site lease, aquaculture license and/or federal authorization.

Under the present legal framework, the absence of scientific standards pertaining to the deposition of deleterious substances into fisheries waters leaves aquaculturists no choice but to operate within a vague and subjective system. Moreover, operating under such a cloud of uncertainty, they never know if their actions will result in a prosecution in the courts. This situation destabilizes investor confidence in the Canadian aquaculture sector.

In the absence of compliance limits based on prescribed circumstances and protocols, parties are free to establish their own views regarding acceptable limits, which has given rise to strongly opposing views and to the development of anti-aquaculture and anti-government campaigns. Scientifically derived standards would provide an effective means by which to evaluate and prosecute non-compliant actions. The lack of clear and transparent standards has negatively influenced public perceptions pertaining to aquaculture, increased tensions between aquaculturists and environmental groups, Aboriginal groups and citizens, and has created uncertainty, confusion and inconsistency among federal officials charged with administering the sector. Therefore, measures to establish compliance guidelines with respect to S. 36 of the Fisheries Act are essential to sustainable aquaculture development (and indeed, for all non-fisheries development throughout the entire coastal resource sector). Recommendations for interim measures are informed by practices in other countries where aquaculture is practised.

Recommendation 3

It is recommended that the federal government enact a regulation under S. 43 of the Fisheries Act which would give Habitat officers discretion to avoid having to consider whether a new or proposed aquaculture operation was likely to cause a harmful alteration, disruption or destruction (HADD) under S.s. 35(2) of the Fisheries Act. Such discretion would be limited to situations where the new or proposed aquaculture operation explicitly subscribed to an approved Code of Practice which, inter alia, addressed fish habitat concerns.

Interpretation and application of S. 35 with respect to aquaculture projects continues to present a significant constraint for aquaculture development. DFO's Habitat Management Policy expressly protects fish habitat, giving fishing activities precedence over other activities that also provide societal benefits, including aquaculture. Provisions for effectively balancing human values (environmental, social, economic) are required to promote the best use of aquatic resources and to ensure that non-fishery activities are not relegated to areas that have no capacity for fisheries production.

Aquaculture has become significant from the perspective of environmental assessment, requiring reviews for both new site development and for the expansion and relocation of existing sites. Applying the federal Habitat Management Policy to aquaculture operations in a timely and consistent manner has proved difficult. Moreover, with the sector poised to expand in many parts of the country, the current challenge will only intensify unless immediate changes are made.

This recommendation will, in essence, allow Habitat officers to avoid having to formally make a determination of whether a HADD exists, thus eliminating the lengthy and costly acquisition of information. The public interest is protected by restricting the use of this discretion to situations where applicants are known to subscribe to approved Codes of Practice that specifically address habitat concerns, such as minimum distance of cages from salmon-bearing streams, etc.

Recommendation 4

It is recommended that the federal government establish an effective protocol to harmonize federal and provincial data and information collection requirements and procedures for conducting timely and efficient Environmental Assessments (EA). This process should include:

Development of a concise federal guide(s) describing information requirements for aquaculture initiatives that will enable the responsible authority to conduct an EA

Identification of a clear decision-making process for EA's
Development of a companion guide(s) intended to help aquaculture-site applicants prepare a screening report for submission to the responsible authority for decision

Development of an internal manual to provide EA officers with guidelines for making consistent decisions across cases and regions, in keeping with the intent of CEAA and other regulatory instruments

Development of class-type screenings for aquaculture under CEAA for both shellfish and finfish (marine and freshwater) operations

Environmental assessment is an important planning and decision-making tool that comprises a significant portion of the review process. Through the organized gathering and review of information, the potential effects of proposed projects on the environment can be identified and understood. The consideration of such effects early in the planning stages of a project promotes better planning and can save time and money by proactively addressing potential issues before they become problems. Thus, CEAA encourages responsible authorities to take actions that promote sustainable development and thereby achieve or maintain a healthy environment and a healthy economy.

It is acknowledged that, if Recommendations 1, 2 and 3 are implemented, the scope of Recommendation 4 will be somewhat reduced.

Recommendation 5

It is recommended that, in view of the private property nature of aquaculture production, Fisheries and Oceans Canada amend the following regulations under the Fisheries Act with a view to excluding aquaculture from its application:

Maritime Provinces Fishery Regulations SOR/93-55 - S.s. 3(d) be amended as follows:

"(d) cultured or cultivated fish found in or taken from (i) an aquaculture area or site operated under a lease or license issued by the Minister or under the Aquaculture Act of Nova Scotia or the Aquaculture Act of New Brunswick, or (ii) a privately owned fish pond that does not contain any wild fish and to which wild fish have no access;"
Atlantic Fishery Regulations SOR/86-21 -Paragraph 3 (e) be replaced as follows:

"3(e) taking fish from an aquaculture operation licensed by a province"
In order for aquaculture in Canada to achieve its potential, an effective legislative framework must be put in place. This will provide a certainty and predictability to the industry that will assist in attracting new investment. It will also lay out in law how the industry is to be developed.

At present, a series of provincial regulations, under the Fisheries Act, are used to regulate the fishery. Some of these regulations exempt aquaculture completely (e.g. Pacific Fishery Regulations), while others contain language that partially exempts aquaculture. For example, the Maritime Provinces Fishery Regulations, which, among other things, control fishing seasons, gear types etc., do not apply to aquaculture except for oysters. This creates concern among oyster growers since they alone are subject to these regulations. Similarly, the Atlantic Fishery Regulations exempt only Atlantic salmon from the regulations.

The existence of uniform set of provincial or regional fisheries regulations exempting aquaculture would benefit the aquaculture sector. Although the Maritime Provinces Fishery Regulations and the Atlantic Fishery Regulations are the focus of this recommendation since they appear to create confusion as to whether all aquaculture or merely some aquaculture is to be exempted, other provincial regulations may need to be assessed to determine if similar clarification is required.

Recommendation 6

It is recommended that greater aquaculture sector involvement in growing water sanitary monitoring for classification purposes be allowed under the Canadian Shellfish Sanitation Program (CSSP). Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) between leaseholders and the relevant federal regulatory agencies, similar to the one currently being used for the management of conditional approved areas, would be signed. These MOU agreements would specify the respective roles and responsibilities of the leaseholder and the regulatory agencies. The MOU's would deal specifically with the harvesting of molluscan shellfish from aquaculture leases, allowing growing area classification and micromanagement at the lease level.

Historically, the shellfish growing water classification program of the CSSP has been conducted by Environment Canada. Due to resource constraints, the department has been unable to keep up with the demand from shellfish growers for new growing water classifications. The involvement of farmers in a growing water monitoring program was considered a potential option for the CSSP regulators and the aquaculture sector in order to maintain and possibly improve the services.

The federal government is currently pursuing an agenda of smart regulation to foster innovation, economic growth and industry competitiveness (Throne Speech, 2002). Water farmers need fair, cost effective and open regulations that will meet public policy objectives. Canada should look at "best regulation" practices of other jurisdictions which are designed to improve aquatic product safety. New Zealand, Maine and California are already moving in the direction of smart regulation in the sanitary management of shellfish growing waters. Third party sampling is now accepted and monitoring agreements with the competent authorities have been developed. Shellfish farmers are allowed to fulfil this role.

It is in the shellfish farmer's best interest to provide safe, quality products for their clients. The CSSP should allow shellfish farmers to be involved in routine sampling on their lease(s) for plankton, biotoxins, fecal coliforms and other hazardous and deleterious substances. The sampling would be performed in a manner and at a frequency prescribed by Environment Canada/CFIA under the CSSP. This approach offers a solution that reinforces and rewards an approach based on simple processes, economic efficiencies and appropriate accountability checks.

Pillar Two New Framework for Enhanced Federal/Provincial/ Territorial Delivery of Aquaculture in Canada
Aquaculture in Canada is a shared responsibility. Provinces have the power to license and regulate the operations of aquaculture companies and to lease provincial lands to aquaculturists. The federal government is responsible for management of the fishery, conservation of wild stocks, protection of the marine environment, the regulation of shipping and the use of navigable waters. As well, in federal waters, the federal government is responsible for regulating access to these waters, including access by aquaculturalists.

Up to now, federal/provincial/territorial coordination has largely been achieved through a series of MOU's negotiated during the 1980's between the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans and the respective provincial fisheries Ministers. As these agreements are between fisheries ministries, naturally they cover fisheriesrelated topics. They do not cover issues that lie outside the mandate of the fisheries departments. Given the importance of issues other than fishing to the success of aquaculture, the present arrangement seems ill suited to meeting the objectives that governments have set for aquaculture development. Many provinces have organized their fisheries and farming sectors into a single department of agriculture, fisheries and food or some variant, in recognition of the need to group all food production activities together.

Recommendation 7

It is recommended that the federal government negotiate a new Aquaculture Framework Agreement supplemented by individual Implementation Agreements with the provinces and territories to:

Coordinate policy objectives for aquaculture development and regulation;
delineate respective roles and responsibilities;
streamline administrative processes and, where appropriate, establish single-window application procedures;
establish service standards;
prescribe consultative mechanisms, including appeals processes and procedures for conflict resolution, and;
identify cost-shared programs and services, where appropriate.
Given the significant and determining role  that governments in Canada play in aquaculture, a renewed approach to federal/provincial/territorial relations is necessary to fully exploit available opportunities. Although considerable progress has been made by the federal, provincial and territorial governments to address challenges and constraints to sustainable aquaculture development, efforts must be intensified. In this regard, the federal government must redouble its efforts to create true partnerships with provincial and territorial governments.

This new structure a national Aquaculture Framework Agreement supplemented by bilateral Implementation Agreements would recognize that aquaculture is a federal priority, reflecting the relevant interests of all federal departments and agencies. It would allow provinces and territories to aggressively pursue aquaculture development where the desire exists. To enhance public accountability and bolster investor confidence, the Aquaculture Framework Agreement and the ancillary Implementation Agreements should be reinforced with realistic service standards, wherever possible. In addition, the need for a strategic, integrated federal/ provincial/territorial approach, supported by national strategies in several critical areas, has been identified as essential to the sustainable development of aquaculture in Canada. Consequently, priority should be placed on development of national strategies for research, development, infrastructure and Aboriginal aquaculture. A national framework agreement, supported by a series of bilateral agreements similar to those introduced in Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada's (AAFC's) Agriculture Policy Framework, is envisaged.

Specific issues requiring policy coordination and cooperative implementation include, but are not limited to:

Site Access and Integrated Management
Establish a planned, balanced and inclusive community approach to rural economic and social development for the benefit of Canadians. Targeted funding for this initiative is outlined in Recommendation 8.
Establish a standardized, "single-window" aquaculture site application and review process in each province and territory.
Environmental Assessment and Monitoring
Develop industry-led and government-approved Environmental Codes of Practice that incorporate science-based standards and principles of adaptive risk management and which are supported by transparency and accountability in monitoring, reporting and enforcement.
Develop a harmonized approach for Navigable Waters Protection Act permitting (refer to Recommendation 4).
Establish class-type environmental screenings under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.
Establish science-based compliance standards to support environmental legislation/regulations.
Food Safety
Develop national food safety standards, which are equivalent to international standards developed for our predominant markets, in a harmonized approach with provincial, territorial and appropriate international jurisdictions.
Develop farm-based Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) food safety systems.
Establish mechanisms to enable product traceability from farm to market.
Research
Establish a coordinated and collaborative framework to emphasize research in support of present and future productivity within the aquaculture sector and to produce continuous improvement in the development of environmentally sustainable technologies.
Develop a national strategy and action plan for aquaculture research.
Aquatic Animal Health
Implement the National Aquatic Animal Health Program.*
Marketing and Trade
Maintain and promote security of access to international trade routes in support of this export-oriented industry.
Take proactive measures to mitigate tariff and non-tariff trade restrictions.
Develop a "Canada Brand" initiative for fish and seafood.
Farm Risk Management, Industry Development and Infrastructure
Develop and implement an aquaculture stock insurance program that provides coverage for extraordinary losses due to natural perils.
Create a national aquaculture development strategy on a cost-shared basis with the provinces/territories and industry to establish programs and services in support of sustainable aquaculture development.
Develop a national aquaculture infrastructure strategy on a cost-shared basis with the provinces/territories to support aquaculture investment and development.
Aboriginal Aquaculture Development
Develop a national strategy for Aboriginal aquaculture development with input from the provinces/territories|13|.
Recommendation 8

It is recommended that the federal government establish a special fund to provide financial resources for development and implementation of integrated management pilot projects in areas where aquaculture is prevalent. The aim of these pilot projects is to develop tools to reduce or eliminate conflict, including establishing aquaculture-suitable zones or aquaculture-free zones, bay management projects, or other coastal land use planning initiatives.

There is an urgent need to develop a more proactive aquaculture planning and siting process. The present "case-by-case" approach is costly and inefficient for all parties, including the government. Moreover, adoption of a more proactively planned and integrated approach that builds on best practices is consistent with the planning approach advanced in the Oceans Act and the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act. The absence of such a strategic approach to date has resulted in conflict, unsustainable resource management practices and lost economic opportunities.

A planned and inclusive community approach to resource management and coastal planning, including effective mechanisms for conflict resolution, is required to effectively balance social and economic sustainability, ecosystem integrity and human values.

Through the establishment of a special fund dedicated to developing planning and dispute avoidance tools, much of the negativity surrounding aquaculture siting could be reduced.

Pillar Three Funding
Recommendation 9

It is recommended that the federal government provide new funding to support the continued growth of the aquaculture sector.

It will be important for the federal government to extend its policies and programs beyond its current fisheries focus into an agri-food focus. Not only will this help the sector to grow, but it will also round out the promise contained in the Agriculture Policy Framework for a Canadawide system of safe and wholesome food production.

To achieve this goal will take new funding. Funding both to strengthen our regulatory system and to put in place badly needed agriculture-type programs. By making such an investment, the federal government will help protect the vitality of coastal and rural communities strengthen and possibly regain its position in the world as a top seafood exporter and reinforce the message that buying Canadian fish and seafood is buying quality.

Back to Top

13.   Although First Nations are a federal responsibility, many provinces are implicated in Aboriginal development initiatives through site access, commerce, property rights, etc.

* Implementation of NAAHP will require a new MC to Report on Negotiations, to present the program and to secure funding.

Organizational Scenarios
Government must consider whether or not the current organizational structure for aquaculture is up to the tasks of delivering the improvements contained in the nine recommendations and providing the necessary federal leadership.

There have been many new challenges facing the aquaculture industry as it attempts to compete in the global food production system. Many of these challenges have arisen from the changing role DFO has undergone as its core objectives have evolved towards marine protection and conservation. A number of other challenges have arisen due to the nature of the sector and its needs. It is a farming activity, with farming programming, policy and regulatory requirements.

There are now as many as 34 federal departments and agencies with either an identifiable role or the capabilities to support the continued sustainable development of aquaculture. Therefore strong horizontal management is required.

Other nations are aligning their organizational structures to better suit the nature and needs of the sector and to enable more effective governance. Canada should too.

The Commissioner believes the following three scenarios represent an improvement over current arrangements and should be assessed.

Scenario 1: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada is Given Responsibility for Aquaculture Development

Under this organizational scenario, AAFC would be given responsibility for Aquaculture development. AAFC would regard aquaculture operators as farmers and provide the same type of policy and program support to fish farmers as to terrestrial farmers through their APF. AAFC would be responsible for the horizontal management of federal aquaculture initiatives and for management of industry/stakeholder/government interactions.

AAFC would also be responsible for vertical management of federal/provincial/ territorial initiatives. The foundation and framework for the vertical management would be attained through the signing of a Canadian Aquaculture Framework Agreement with the provinces/territories and by Implementation Agreements negotiated with each of the provinces/territories.

The current lead agency for aquaculture, DFO, would maintain its regulatory responsibilities for the protection of wild fish stocks and fish habitat. DFO would involve itself in the regulation of aquaculture where aquaculture had an impact on DFO's core legislative responsibilities for wild fish stocks and fish habitat. DFO would not be directly involved in aquaculture development activities; rather, the department would provide support to Agriculture Canada's development efforts by means of a regulatory and policy framework that is conducive to sustainable growth and development of the sector.

Considerations:

The aquaculture industry cannot continue to be treated as a subset of the fishery. Aquaculture is a farming not fishing industry.

It has become clear that successful aquaculture development in Canada, as in other countries, requires an agri-food policy and programming approach that responds to the developmental needs of the sector. Agriculture Canada, with the addition of some further aquaculturespecific expertise, has the capability of providing this key agri-food support. Of the three scenarios identified, this is the one that is most likely to open up the broadest array of AAFC's policy and program support. Moreover, it is probably the option that would bring in that necessary agri-food support in the most administratively cost effective manner.

The aquaculture client group would be quite receptive to such a change. On a number of occasions, representatives of the industry have expressed a desire for more of an agricultural policy approach to the sector, as well as a transfer of lead agency responsibilities to AAFC. Moreover, a portion of Agriculture Canada's core client group is already involved with aquaculture and there are many more who are considering diversifying into aquaculture.

A number of provinces (e.g. British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec) have already made an adjustment to accommodate the agri- food aspects of aquaculture through organizational change.

If AAFC was given responsibility for aquaculture development, DFO would be able to focus more on conservation, protection and economic management of the fisheries. A transfer would also serve to reduce the real and perceived conflicts between DFO's regulatory responsibilities related to conserving the wild fish resource, and its being the lead for aquaculture development.

Transferring responsibility for aquaculture over to AAFC would not be without its challenges. However, those challenges can be readily addressed. First, Agriculture Canada would need enhanced levels of expertise on aquaculture in a number of areas, including fish biology. In addition, to maximize efficiency of program support for aquaculture and delivery of the lead agency role, some program elements such as aquaculture R&D from DFO, would likely need to be transferred from other agencies. However, both the enhancement of aquaculture-specific expertise and program transfers should be accomplished without too much difficulty. There is expertise that could be transferred from OCAD and from DFO's Aquaculture Science Directorate and Office of Sustainable Aquaculture which would meet most, if not all, of AAFC's immediate requirements for additional aquaculture expertise.

Second, there are already existing MOUs and co-operative arrangements between DFO and the designated lead provincial/territorial agencies in place for provinces and territories. However, as is noted in Recommendation 7 of this report, a renewed approach to federal/provincial/territorial relations is necessary to fully exploit Canada's opportunities for aquaculture development.

More effective federal/provincial/territorial partnerships to address the constraints to development are required. The approach that appears to offer the most opportunity for meeting the needs in this area (and which is discussed in Recommendation 7) is to develop a Canadian Aquaculture Framework Agreement together with a series of provincial/territorial framework agreements. This approach is in fact modelled on what AAFC is already doing for agriculture and it has the experience in negotiating and operating under such federal/provincial/territorial cooperative frameworks. Moreover, access to much of the APF program support that is required by aquaculturists is governed and/or covered by the Agriculture Framework Agreement and the provincial/territorial Implementation Agreements.

Scenario 2: An Aquaculture Agency is Established

An Aquaculture agency could be established that would be responsible for Aquaculture development. Such an agency could report to the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans or to the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food. The agency would provide direct program support to the sector itself, such as the Aquaculture Collaborative Research and Development Program (ACRDP), and also research support, but would not be involved in regulation.

The agency would be responsible for horizontal management of federal aquaculture initiatives and for management of the industry/stakeholder/government interactions. The agency would also be responsible for vertical management of federal/provincial/territorial initiatives.

As with scenario 1 (transfer of responsibility for aquaculture development to AAFC), the current lead agency for aquaculture, DFO, would maintain its regulatory responsibilities for the protection of wild fish stocks and fish habitat. DFO would involve itself in the regulation of aquaculture where aquaculture had an impact on DFO's core legislative responsibilities for wild fish stocks and fish habitat. DFO would not be directly involved in aquaculture development activities; rather the department would provide support to the agency's development efforts by having a regulatory and policy framework that is conducive to sustainable growth and development of the sector.

As well, all other federal government agencies would maintain their current regulatory roles and responsibilities.

The core staffing of such an agency could largely be drawn from OCAD and from DFO's Aquaculture Science Directorate and Office of Sustainable Aquaculture.

Considerations:

The establishment of an Aquaculture agency would have the particular advantage of sending a clear message to the aquaculture client group that aquaculture development is viewed by the federal government as being important, and the needs of the sector will be given specific attention by an agency that is established to focus on it. The establishment of such an agency would likely receive strong support from the aquaculture client group.

The establishment of an agency would also confirm the acknowledgement by the federal government that Canadian aquaculture's potential is substantial and that Canada does not want to be left behind by competing countries. Rather, it wants to be a world leader in sustainable aquaculture for the decades to come.

Similar to a transfer of aquaculture development responsibilities to AAFC, the establishment of an agency would enable DFO to focus more on conservation, protection and economic management of the fisheries. The establishment of such an agency particularly if it reported to the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-food would serve to eliminate the issue of whether there was any validity to concerns that have been raised about whether there is an inherent conflict between DFO's regulatory responsibilities related to sustaining the wild fish resource and its being the lead for aquaculture development. As such, it would contribute significantly to reducing, if not eliminating, the criticism of DFO that it is in a conflict of interest with respect to its support of aquaculture development.

The establishment of an agency would also enable the consolidation and integration of program support within the agency in critical areas such as research.

There are some potential challenges to pursuing this option. In particular, the establishment of an agency does not eliminate the need for AAFC to be significantly involved in the file to obtain the agri-food type of support that the aquaculture sector will need for its continued development. In fact, much of the development-oriented support and agri-food expertise that is needed to guide the sector's development would still need to be drawn from AAFC unless a number of the programs and capabilities of AAFC were replicated by the agency. For example, the APF programs that would benefit industry development would still need to be accessed through AAFC, unless an agency was to create and secure funding for APF-like, but aquaculture-specific, programs itself.

Scenario 3: DFO Continues as Lead Agency, but Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada's APF is opened to Aquaculture

This scenario would be the organizational status quo (for the federal government) with the exception that AAFC would open up the programs that are relevant and applicable to aquaculture. Agriculture Canada would be involved with the aquaculture file in relation to its administration of the specific programs opened up and to the extent that aquaculture is addressed within AAFC's Canada Food Branding initiative and its National Seafood Roundtable.

However, it would involve DFO fully engaging as a lead agency to support the continued growth, development and environmental sustainability of the sector.

Aquaculture is a difficult policy and management challenge, involving multiple government agencies at the federal, provincial/territorial and municipal levels. Moreover, the rapidly growing and evolving nature of the sector, the range of species cultured and the diverse regional differences in activities intensify the degree of complexity. Such a file necessitates effective leadership in three fundamental areas:

Horizontal management of federal initiatives
Vertical management of federal/provincial/territorial initiatives
Management of industry-stakeholdergovernment interactions
Effective management of aquaculture is also predicated upon an open and transparent dialogue between and amongst all stakeholders, including industry, governments, academe, other user groups and the public at large. By providing a focal point for communications pertaining to aquaculture, the federal lead agency can establish a reliable conduit to facilitate effective dissemination of objective information about aquaculture.

The Federal Aquaculture Development Strategy, which was approved by Cabinet in 1994, calls for the federal lead agency to "encourage the development of a federal policy, program and regulatory environment that is complementary to industry and provincial / territorial activities" and to "coordinate the aquaculture-related activities of all federal departments in order to maximize efficiency and minimize duplication." The strategy specifically identifies the lead agency role to be as follows:

1. Coordination

Chair federal inter-agency meetings to enhance communication and cooperation among federal departments and agencies.
Harmonize Canada's work in aquaculture with international standards and protocols, particularly with regard to product safety and inspection.
2. Policy

Coordinate federal policy on issues pertinent to aquaculture.
Promote the development of a harmonized federal regulatory framework.
3. Advocacy

Advocate the sustainable development of aquaculture in Canada.
Promote industry interests and perspectives to other federal departments and agencies.
4. Liaison

Promote increased dialogue and communication between all stakeholders.
Also recognized in the strategy was the need for a close, ongoing working relationship with the provinces and territories, which was also implicit as part of the federal lead role.
Considerations:

This option would have the advantage that no potentially disruptive organizational changes would be required on the part of the federal government to implement the plan. However, DFO would have to make adjustments to orientations, priorities, resourcing and staffing to effectively play the lead agency role required for continued development of the industry and effective governance of the sector.

Opening up the relevant and applicable APF programs to aquaculturists would grant aquaculturists the eligibility to benefit from these programs. However, there could be significant administrative challenges to making such an arrangement work effectively.

Moreover, this option is not likely going to result in as extensive support from AAFC, as required. This scenario is also likely to require a referral to Cabinet for decision because of its broader governmental implications.

There is also considerable doubt that AAFC would undertake the considerable administrative effort necessary to open up the APF programs at all, if it was not made responsible for aquaculture development. There would seem to be little incentive for it to do so.

This approach would not likely contribute to a reduction in the criticism that the government is receiving about an inherent conflict between DFO's regulatory responsibilities related to sustaining the wild fish resource and being the lead for aquaculture development. Nor will this option enable DFO to refocus its efforts on wild fisheries issues and problems that are at the very core of its mandated responsibilities. These are considered to be some of the most serious negative implications of this option.

And finally, this option is the least likely to find favour with the aquaculture client group.

Back to Top

CONCLUSION
Aquaculture is one of the few development opportunities that depends upon remote communities to be realized. This unique characteristic represents an incredible opportunity to rejuvenate economic activity for many rural and coastal communities currently facing high levels of unemployment and population exodus.

Aquaculture is here to stay and will constitute a major food industry for many decades to come. If Canada wants to reap significant socio-economic benefits and be a world leader, not only in terms of a diversified production but also in terms of environmentally sustainable technologies and practices, it is essential to initiate a strategic change in the way we do business in the future.

The federal government must play both its regulatory and developmental roles if Canadian aquaculture is to achieve its potential. To do this effectively will require a change to the current fisheries-dominated policy approach in favour of an approach that recognizes the agri-food nature of aquaculture. A new federal/provincial/ territorial arrangement is required to ensure that all government departments and agencies will have an opportunity to contribute to the growth of the aquaculture sector.

Taken together, the recommendations suggested in this report would, if implemented, demonstrate leadership and commitment on the part of the federal government. The transition to a new regime will not be easy but it will be worthwhile.

New economic opportunities in Canada's rural, Aboriginal and coastal communities will be the result of this concerted effort. A better future for these Canadians is within our grasp if we are bold enough to act.

Members of the Government participated in the deliberations of the Imperial
Conference which followed immediately after the Coronation. The Summary of
Proceedings of the Conference will be placed before you at an early date for
your consideration. It is the belief of the Government that the opportunities
afforded for the exchange of views and information on questions of common
interest and concern, will serve to further the well-being of all parts of the
Commonwealth.
I t is gratifying to note that, during the past year, there has been a further
substantial advance in Canada's economic recovery. Revenues have reached
new levels. Trade with other countries has materially expanded. There has
been a general increase in employment and marked decrease in the numbers
receiving unemployment aid.
The recurrence, in a more acute form, of drought conditions in certain areas
of Western Canada has unfortunately made it necessary to provide assistance
on an unprecedented scale. The Government intends to continue its activities
under the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act.
In view of the success which has attended efforts to assist in the training of
unemployed young people, it is proposed to extend the scheme during the coming
year.
The Department of Agriculture has been reorganized and its services
consolidated along lines designed to improve the Standard and acceptability of
Canadian farm products.

INAC has re-assessed shelter and prevention project components of the program in view of authority renewal process. 

As you know, I have serious concerns about section 4.82 of your Bill C-55, which would give the RCMP and CSIS unrestricted access to personal information of air travellers. In summary, my concern is that its provisions could fundamentally and unnecessarily alter the balance between individuals and the state that exists and should exist in a free society such as Canada.

When I met with you on Thursday, April 25, as you disclosed last week in the House of Commons, I outlined these concerns about the provision in question, which had been described to me in general terms. I requested that you briefly delay introduction of the legislation to allow time to explore options for meeting the legitimate anti-terrorism objectives of this provision without unduly infringing on privacy rights.

My hope had been to avoid unnecessary public controversy by working together cooperatively, as had been the case with Bills C-44 and C-42. I regret that you have declined to take this course. Since the matter is now in the public domain, in the interests of transparency I consider it appropriate to make this letter public upon your receipt of it.

Let me emphasize at the outset that I appreciate fully that other departments and/or agencies may have persuaded you of the desirability of including section 4.82 in this legislation, as your staff have indicated to my Office.

Nevertheless, Bill C-55 is your bill, identified as presented to Parliament by the Minister of Transport. And section 4.82 is a proposed amendment to the Aeronautics Act, for which you have responsibility as Minister of Transport. Therefore it is my view that you, and only you, are the minister ultimately accountable on behalf of the government for the provision in question, and it is both necessary and appropriate that I direct my concerns in this matter to you.

As you know, I have stated repeatedly since September 11 that I would never seek, as Privacy Commissioner, to stand in the way of any appropriate initiatives to enhance public security against terrorism, even if they entail some limitation of privacy rights. I have also stated, however, that the burden of proof must always rest with those who propose some new limitation on a fundamental human right such as privacy.

To meet that burden of proof, I have suggested since September 11 - and the government has not disagreed with me - that any proposed new initiative that would limit or infringe on privacy rights must meet four key criteria: It must be demonstrably necessary to address a specific problem or need. It must be demonstrably likely to be effective in addressing that problem or need. The limitation of privacy rights must be proportional to the security benefit to be derived. And there must be no other, less privacy-invasive means to achieve the same objective.

It is against this background that I am writing to you today to respectfully request your immediate answers to questions that are necessary to assist me in understanding why you believe that section 4.82 meets the above-mentioned criteria. Since Bill C-55 is not emergency legislation, I trust that you have taken the time to obtain all pertinent information to weigh the appropriateness and necessity of the provisions in question prior to introducing the bill, and must have this information readily available.

As your responses to these questions will be very helpful to me in preparing my Committee testimony on this legislation, I would be grateful if you could provide them at the earliest possible time, and certainly by this Friday, May 10.

As I told you in our meeting and have since stated publicly, I would have no privacy objection if the provisions of section 4.82 were limited to screening passenger information against data bases of known and suspected terrorists, and if all information that did not produce a match against these data bases were to be immediately destroyed. The following questions, consequently, focus on provisions that go far beyond anti-terrorism measures.

Necessity

In general terms, what is the basis for your view that it is necessary for the RCMP to be granted the power to examine the personal information of airline passengers for purposes unrelated to anti-terrorism, including searching for individuals subject to outstanding warrants for any offence punishable by imprisonment for five years or more?
Since the stated purpose of Bill C-55 is "to enhance public safety," what incidents presenting a threat to public safety have been carried out in the past year on flights subject to the Aeronautics Act by individuals subject to outstanding warrants for offences punishable by imprisonment for five years or more?
In the past year, has there been an increase in the number or percentage of individuals sought on Canadian warrants for offences punishable by imprisonment for five years or more who have evaded capture for more than 30 days? If so, what are the pertinent statistics, and to what factors is this increase attributed?
What new factors have arisen since Bill C-42 was introduced on November 22, 2001 that now make it necessary for the RCMP to scan passenger information in search of individuals wanted on warrants for offences punishable by imprisonment for five years or more, when it was not necessary at that time?
What threats to public safety, and particularly aviation safety, do you believe are likely to be posed by individuals who are wanted on warrants for such offences as fraudulently altering brands on cattle, taking possession of drift timber or unauthorized use of a computer - all Criminal Code offences punishable by prison terms of five or more years?
In view of all the other investigative tools available to the RCMP and CSIS, including the new powers conferred under Bill C-36, why is it necessary to give CSIS and the RCMP open-ended authority to retain the personal information of unlimited numbers of law-abiding Canadian travellers in order to search for possible suspicious travel patterns?
Effectiveness

What research or analysis leads you to the view that a significant number of individuals who are wanted on warrants will travel by air rather than choose alternative modes of transportation, particularly on domestic routes, once it is publicly known that passenger information is to be screened by the RCMP for outstanding warrants?
In view of the relatively low level of identity authentication for domestic flights, what research or analysis leads you to the view that individuals who are wanted on outstanding warrants will travel on their own identities once it is known that passenger information is to be screened by the RCMP?
What statistical analysis has been done to estimate the number of law-abiding Canadian air travellers who are likely to be detained by police in error through this screening process, as the result of having a name similar to that of an individual who is wanted on an outstanding warrant?
Since travel patterns that appear suspicious in the absence of additional information may in reality be entirely innocent, what provisions will be made to clear unfounded suspicions by notifying individuals that their travel patterns have aroused CSIS or RCMP interest and providing the opportunity to clear their names? In view of the security exemptions limiting the right of individuals to obtain their personal information under the Privacy Act, will travellers be able to establish whether CSIS or the RCMP has opened a file on them due to travel patterns regarded as suspicious and, if so, will they be provided the opportunity to clear their name and have the file closed?
Proportionality and Available Alternatives

In this instance, the determination of proportionality and available alternatives depends largely on the answers to the questions about necessity and effectiveness. Depending on your responses to those questions, I may take the liberty of contacting you further to seek additional clarification as to proportionality and available alternatives.

As I briefly outlined to you when we met and as I detailed in my statement of May 1 (copy enclosed), I consider the measures proposed in section 4.82 to constitute a very significant change in the powers accorded to the police in Canadian society and therefore a very important limitation on privacy rights. I would therefore appreciate your response to the following general question: What considerations lead you to the view that this very serious limitation on privacy rights would be proportional to the benefits to be derived?

Because this issue is now so much in the public domain, I will feel obliged to make your response to this letter public. Alternatively, you are of course welcome to make your response public at the same time you provide it to me, if you prefer.

My previous conversations with you have given me a sense that you appreciate both the importance of the fundamental human right of privacy and your responsibility as a Minister to ensure that this right is never unduly infringed or limited by government policy. I am therefore hopeful that your responses to these questions will assist in putting your proposed section 4.82 into the appropriate perspective.

Yours sincerely, Brenda.
